Case study 5: 

As part of my development as an educator, I make the effort to learn
new and difficult things from time to time, specifically to experience
education "from the other side of the desk".

For about a year now, I have been practising krav maga ("krav"), a
combat system originally developed for military use but now adapted
for civilian self-defense.  I took it up following pressure from my
family to become more physically active and to take more exercise
(which is my primary motivation for krav).

However, it is a salutary experience to learn something that I am not
very good at.  As a general rule, adults simply do not do this: as
adults, we are usually in control, and operate at pretty much a
permanent state of high competence.  Occasionally we move out of our
comfort zone and take an evening class in crochet or pottery or
creative writing, but for the most part we never attempt anything
unless we are almost guaranteed to succeed.

Compare this with two other groups: children and undergraduates.  Take
children first.  Their teachers and parents spare no effort in
cajoling and encouraging them---"just have a go!"--in endeavours such
as horse riding, through ballet, chess, piano playing; the list is
endless.  A lot of this is with the explicit goal of gaining
"confidence", a line of thought that has troubled me for decades:
surely the goal is competence, not confidence? I do not view
confidence as being particularly desirable; the dangers of
over-confidence are surely obvious.  I guess parents are worried about
their offspring developing an extreme lack of confidence that
discourages attempts at anything new.  But surely confidence should be
based on confidence, rather than one's mother saying---with the very
best of intentions---"well done Jimmy! you are good at that!".  Any
half-way intelligent child sees this for the shallow deception that it
is, and of course Mummy's unshakeable faith will not do one much good
on the rugby field or in the boxing ring.  Faced with the cognitive
dissonance of being told how good one is at something, and the harsh
objective fact of being thrashed to nil repeatedly, I could argue that
"confidence" is, on balance, a liability.  Also note that the
directive to "just have a go!" carries very little authenticity when
coming from parents who themselves never "just have a go" at anything
new.
  
Turning to undergraduates, one would expect that they, being adults,
would tend to engage only in areas in which they are competent.  But,
university courses typically contain "duty" subjects which one is
obliged to learn before graduation.  For example, psychology or
biology majors would be required to take at least one statistics
course (I teach statistics).  And many students have very little
natural aptitude in numerical science.  I want experience learning
something that I have little natural ability in, so I can deal with
such students more effectively.

And I have realised that krav maga allows me to do this.

By any conceivable standard of my instructor, I am hopeless at krav.
I am easily the oldest and crumbliest student there: I am 52 and I
would say that the next oldest student is in his early forties; most
of the class are in their mid twenties.  I have taken zero physical
exercise for ten years.  Quite apart from that, I studied karate as a
young man for many many years, and many karate techniques are
positively counterproductive for krav; I acquired what now appear to
be bad habits, which have to be unlearned.  My instructor corrects my
terrible movements with gentle, resigned patience.

But on my own terms, I have enjoyed huge success. Notably, I've lost a
lot of weight: I've gone down two shirt sizes (from XXL in 2018 to L
today).  My clothes fit me better in general; I have more energy and
am eating better and more healthily (more fruit and almost no junk
food).  In the world of krav too, I am gradually acquiring the muscle
memory to execute some of the more basic techniques.  Subtle things:
occasionally, I am chosen to demonstrate a technique to the class.  I
am now allowed to partner with first-time students.  I can identify
slight discrepancies between the two instructors' techniques.

A few weeks ago, I was training three times a week and this proved to
be domestically difficult.  I had a robust discussion of this with my
wife Lesley.  At one point I said (in the heat of an argument) that I
wanted to train three times a week "to show my instructors how much
I've improved".  Lesley said that I shouldn't be trying to impress the
instructors.

Impressing instructors is something that has fascinated me, in the
context of undergraduate statistics education, for long time.  It
worries me that, in emphasising the role of the educator (in this
case, encouraging students to work hard just to impress the lecturer)
is a short-term strategy: once the student leaves university, the
motivation to study vanishes.  Surely we as educators should be aiming
for life-long learning, and encouraging this kind of dependence on the
institution and lecturers is inimical to that.

So, perhaps we can learn something from my argument with Lesley.  What
I *meant* to say was that my instructors had shown me great patience
and long-suffering compassionate aid.  And I wanted to return the
favour by demonstrating commitment to krav.  I wanted their efforts
not to have been in vain; that is, I wanted to show them that their
instruction was effective, and appreciated.  And I do this in two
ways: attending more training sessions, and also by actually being a
better krav practitioner.

And what Lesley meant to say, I think, was that measuring one's worth
by reference to another's opinion is a shallow way to live one's life.

One result of reflecting on this issue has been that I try to
de-emphasise the role of the lecturer and tutor in undergraduate
statistics courses.  In the context of discussing exam marking of
students' work it is less of "if you demonstrate understanding of
concept X in the exam, you will impress me and get marks" and more of
"If you really understand concept X this is very useful [in biology]
and if you understand it, you can demonstrate this in the exam".  Note
the de-emphasis on the marker; note also the enhancement of the value
of the learning in and of itself (and also note the starting point is
the understanding, which leads to benefits).  I think this is an
important line of reasoning (in the context of educational leadership,
this has had a number of effects, but notably I call out "charismatic"
educators who I believe promote institutional dependency.  This is
*not* a popular thing to do, but I have to do it).

However, the issue is more complicated than that.  Let's accept for
the moment the notion of education as "introduction to a community of
practice".  The community in question is mathematicians, so what do
real mathematicians like me do?  Well, I spend my time trying to
impress other mathematicians (notably in the process of peer-review
but also in conferences).  So perhaps emphasising that student work to
impress me isn't that bad an idea.


===

I am due to attend a "grading" next week, where I will be assessed on
my technique and, if successful, awarded a certificate of proficiency.
I am reflecting on the general principles of graded learning, stepwise
advancement, structured courses, and hierarchical subjects in general.

On the one hand, I don't care about the grading.  I study krav to
learn a skill, and to get fit and lose weight.  It gets me out of the
house and hopefully lends some authenticity to my attempts to lead and
inspire my family by example.  Having a certificate makes no
difference whatsoever: if I am called to use these skills in earnest,
noone will know or care whether I have attained P1 krav.  I would
attend classes and put effort in with or without any certificate on
offer.  In a previous life I would call this attitude a "mastery
mindset": I want to be able to *do* krav, and I don't really care
whether anyone knows this.  The scarecrow in the Wizard of Oz didn't
actually become cleverer on receiving his diploma.

And yet...if I am honest, I want this P1 certificate.  I want it bad.
I want it so bad it hurts.  I want to have my photo taken with my
classmates, all proudly holding our P1 certificates.  Why? Having P1
paves the way for P2 and onwards!  But OTOH, having P1 won't make me
any more adept at krav, or more likely to be able to use krav
effectively if I ever need to.  But the scarecrow was undeniably more
confident (and his opinions had more weight) after receiving his
diploma, and I want that confidence and recognition too.

I went to the first of two P1 grading sessions today.  I travelled to
Birkenhead and spent two hours demonstrating krav movements to my
instructors (now assessors), and being painfully aware that my
technique was not quite up to par.  The second (and more crucial)
session is in a fortnight.  The whole grading process has motivated me
to attend more classes, and to work harder at practising.  I want to
get these techniques perfect.  A cynical response to this would be to
point out that the motivation is nothing but backwash---that is, the
influence that an assessment has on student learning.  Usually this is
held up as a bad thing, in that it actively discourages students from
making their own discoveries and inhibits general learning.  But in
this case I do not agree: the krav syllabus is specially chosen to be
the most used techniques among a large selection.  So I *should* focus
on the P1 techniques, as these collectively are a sine qua non for
practitioners.  Interestingly, one of my instructors said that the
curriculum for P1 was not chosen on the basis of difficulty, but
usefulness.  I guess this line of reasoning applies to mathematics
education too: we teach quadratic equations but not cubic on
utilitarian grounds as much as difficulty.  In particular, in my
discussions with colleagues it has clarified the notion of
"foundation" courses.  In this context, "foundation" means nothing
more than facilitation of further learning, which I find to be a very
poor guiding philosophy.  It is good to reflect on this metaphor in a
different context, and in this case does not show AUT's structure in a
good light.

Many of my academic colleagues, some of whom are quite experienced,
suggest that AUT abandons examinations as an assessment item.  "It's
stressful for students", they explain.  "Students hate it" they
assert.  "It's an unnatural assessment methodology" they claim.  I
could discredit these stances (I have strong opinions on the matter).
But here, note how effective my little old p1 grading has been in
motivating me to practice krav.

My instructor announced that Eyal Yanilov would be giving a seminar in
January.  Yanilov is the chief instructor of krav maga global and is
pretty much the world's number 1 practitioner.  I've attended similar
seminars before, run by other top international practitioners, and
frankly I was not sure it was a good use of my time.  Sure, they were
very good at krav, but this did not necessarily translate into their
being able to *teach*.  And my instructors are very, very good at
teaching krav to people of my ability (that is, beginner).  At the
very low level I work at, I can't really tell the difference between a
all-time top exponent, and my regular instructor who is certainly very
competent but not global elite.

This makes me wonder about various aspects of mathematics education.
Is research activity necesary for mathematics education?  Well
universities are required by law to have by those engaged in research.
And education should be more than recycled old dusty textbooks.
