
Understanding


The words "understand" and "understanding" appear frequently in course
descriptors under the learning objectives.  However, I now realise
that the concept of 'understanding' is considerably more complex than
might be thought.

To take an example, one typical learning objective might read:

"On completing this course, the student will _understand_ linear
equations".

What *exactly* does "understand" mean in this context?  One might be
forgiven for saying, cynically, that it means no more and no less than
"be able to answer well-rehearsed examination questions isomorphic to
those in previous assessments".  But such a view is deeply
unsatisfactory from many many perspectives, although articulating
precisely what is wrong with it is a difficult matter.  For example,
one might hold that it is perfectly possible to answer such
examination questions without a trace of real understanding.  But such
sentiments beg the question: what does "real understanding" mean?

Bereiter considers this and makes several obervations about
understanding.  Using NLM as an example, we have:


* Understanding is a feature of one's relationship with a concept;
  understanding is a thus dependent on how one expects to interact
  with that concept.  Bereiter offers "Newton's Laws of motion" as an
  example (one that I am able to discuss with some insight: I am
  originally a physicist---not a statistician---my PhD is fluid
  dynamics).  "Understanding" NLM will depend on one's relationship
  with them.  One might expect different *kinds* of understanding
  appropriate to a secondary science teacher, a science historian, a
  relativist, and a rocket scientist.  My brother is a professional
  aerospace engineer and I am a theoretical physicist: when we "talk
  shop" we spend 99% of our time bridging our language and cultural
  differences; one would hardly think we are discussing the same
  underlying concepts.

* One classical definition of understanding is the ability to act
  intelligently in relation to the theory.  However, from an
  educational perspective, this is seriously flawed: to achieve
  understanding as so defined, all one has to do is to teach the
  action required to demonstrate "act intelligently": we thus reduce
  our students to performing monkeys, surely not the idea.

* Understanding is inextricably linked to interest.  One might make a
  case for understanding to *require* a certain level of interest on
  the part of a student.  My own feeling is that this, while a
  reasonable requirement, would disbar the majority of undergraduates
  from study.

* Understanding is not necessarily accompanied by an ability to
  explain.  I spent a very frustrating evening with my brother
  discussing a problem in military engineering to no avail: although I
  understood the physics of the problem, I was unable to convince him
  that I was right.

* There can be many types of understanding, not necessarily consistent
  with one another.  There are, however, recognisably incorrect
  interpretations.


I have been reflecting on this for a while now.
