Case study 4:  taekwondo

I am very interested in motivation, interpreted in its most general
form as an abstract guiding principle for behaviour.  For my teaching,
the motivation I am most concerned about is motivation to study
mathematics.

From the perspective of motivation, mathematics education is an
unmitigated failure.  Students hate it and have to be bullied or
otherwise coerced into studying a system of essentially zero value.
In this case study I consider one form of human activity, martial
arts, which seems to motivate its students highly effectively; I
ponder whether we mathematics educators can learn anything from the
martial arts community.

My daughter Annabel (14yo) has practised taekwondo (TKD) for over five
years.  She is now only one test away from attaining a black belt, and
will be grading next year.  My view is that martial arts somehow
motivate young men and women to study an abstract and demanding
discipline, over many years, with no immediate payoff.  As far as
motivation is concerned, martial arts are succeeding where mathematics
education is failing.  There follow a number of possible explanations
for the discrepancy.

In the past, I have studied three different martial arts (judo,
ju-jitsu, karate) to a level somewhat below Annabel's proficiency at
TKD.  So I have some insight into TKD culture although as Annabel
repeatedly points out TKD and karate are different things (there are
many examples of nuances invisible to outsiders: chess/draughts;
geek/nerds; AUT/UoA; the list is endless).

One problem with mathematics is that students tend to lose motivation
during the years that math is compulsory and I've often thought that
we mathematics educators could adopt a system like the TKD belts.
Everyone laughs when I suggest this.  This annoys me: mathematics
education is an unmitigated disaster, and mathematics educators are
certainly not in a position where we can ignore or denigrate
successful systems such as coloured martial arts belts.

The first question is, I guess, is what features do belts have that
makes them so amazingly successful as motivational tools?

* (difficult) Belts are difficult to obtain and the grading process is
   rigorous.  I'd say that mathematics is difficult for most people
   but the difference is that performance in TKD is driven almost
   purely by practise, not by disposition or innate ability.  And the
   instructor makes no bones about this.  

* (public) The outcome, a different-coloured belt, is very public.
  Compare mathematics, in which success has no visible result.  Even
  if it did, see the next bullet point.

* (status).  Possessing a higher belt confers immediate and visible
  status in the training room.  Having a higher belt permits the
  student to learn more interesting things (new types of attack, for
  example, or more complicated and impressive patterns).  The newer
  students respect, and look up to, the more highly belted students.
  It is quite common for a sensei (senior instructor) to refer
  directly to a student by rank, as in "yellow belt, that was good
  work"; or "green belts, remember to face the front".  Compare
  mathematics where we have nothing of the sort: suppose I offered the
  equivalent of a green belt to high-achieving students.  This might
  be a nice ink pen that only A+ students are allowed to use, or
  perhaps a round metal lapel badge, a bit like an old fashioned
  prefect's badge at Hogwarts.  I don't really know, but such status
  symbols would almost certainly backfire.  The recipients, I strongly
  suspect, would reject these things.  Why is this so different from
  martial arts?

* (objective). As far as I can tell, the grading process is stable and
  objective, and does not suffer from anything like dumbed-down exams
  or grade inflation.  Certainly in judo (which I did 30 years ago),
  you have to fight a real opponent to earn the next belt, and only
  one of the two will successfully grade: this is *real* competition.
  To a black belt you have to defeat a certain number of people.  It's
  the same in TKD, at least at the higher levels.  In math, my
  perception is that the syllabus is pretty arbitrary.  There *are*
  competitive mathematics competitions which I discuss below.

* (progressive). There is a clear incremental progression towards
  black belt, which is a clear marker of TKD competence: objective
  evidence that one has what it takes.  It is nice to have "I'll be a
  black belt someday" in mind when struggling with some yellow-belt
  technique.  I see no endpoint in math.  Certainly no publicly
  visible endpoint (I guess you could say "I have a degree in math").

* (instant feedback).  The grading process itself is pretty much
  instant: you know immediately whether you have passed or not
  (actually this isn't quite true.  The instructor formally reserves
  judgement for a few days for some inscrutable reason.  But you just
  *know* how you've done, straight away).  It is difficult to say for
  sure but many students are poor at assessing their own exam
  performance.

* (competitive) TKD holds regional and national competitions maybe
  twice a year, usually in a large indoor stadium.  Thousands of
  practitioners, at all levels from yellow belt to black, compete for
  a range of medals including patterns (stylised sequences of moves,
  against imaginary opponents, to instil the basic TKD repetoire),
  combat (usually semi-contact a bit like boxing) and breaking
  (practitioners have to snap a standardised breaking board using
  specified techniques).  The medals are hard currency: Annabel
  typically wins two or three in different disciplines, and 

