Understanding


The words "understand" and "understanding" appear frequently in course
descriptors under the learning objectives.  However, I now realise
that the concept of 'understanding' is considerably more complex than
might be thought.

To take an example, one typical learning objective might read:

"On completing this course, the student will _understand_ linear
equations".

What *exactly* does "understand" mean in this context?  One might be
forgiven for saying, cynically, that it means no more and no less than
"be able to answer well-rehearsed examination questions isomorphic to
those in previous assessments".  But such a view is deeply
unsatisfactory from many many perspectives, although articulating
precisely what is wrong with it is a difficult matter.  For example,
one might hold that it is perfectly possible to answer such
examination questions without a trace of real understanding.  But such
sentiments beg the question: what does "real understanding" mean?

Bereiter considers this and makes several obervations about
understanding.  Using NLM as an example, we have:


* Understanding is a feature of one's relationship with a concept;
  understanding is a thus dependent on how one expects to interact
  with that concept.  Bereiter offers "Newton's Laws of motion" as an
  example (one that I am able to discuss with some insight: I am
  originally a physicist---not a statistician---and my PhD is fluid
  dynamics).  "Understanding" NLM will depend on one's relationship
  with them.  One might expect different *kinds* of understanding
  appropriate to a secondary science teacher, a science historian, a
  relativist, and a rocket scientist.  My brother is a professional
  aerospace engineer and I am a theoretical physicist: when we "talk
  shop" we spend 99% of our time bridging our language and cultural
  differences; one would hardly think we are discussing the same
  underlying concepts.

* One classical definition of understanding is the ability to act
  intelligently in relation to the theory.  However, from an
  educational perspective, this is seriously flawed: to achieve
  understanding as so defined, all one has to do is to teach the
  action required to demonstrate "act intelligently": we thus reduce
  our students to performing monkeys, surely not the idea.

* Understanding is inextricably linked to interest.  One might make a
  case for understanding to *require* a certain level of interest on
  the part of a student.  This is my view, but my children all
  disagree with me on this issue.

* Understanding is not necessarily accompanied by an ability to
  explain.  One can 'understand' that a cat would be unhappy with a
  particular change without being able to explain why.  One could
  'understand' how to negotiate a roundabout, or organise a football
  team, with no ability to articulate the skills required.

* There can be many types of understanding, not necessarily consistent
  with one another.  There are, however, recognisably incorrect
  interpretations.

I have been reflecting on this for a while now.  One difficulty of
discussing understanding is the English language.  Is "understanding"
a thing, a process, a possession, an ability, or a habit?  I could
make a case for any of these.

From an academic leadership perspective, I can ask whether the
'understanding' in our descriptors is useful or appropriate, how we
might assess it, and whether acquiriring it is likely to be permanent
or temporary, or whether it is necessary for future learning.

