Case study 3: computer games and education

I think that many of the issues connected with the meaning and value
of education are faced by many families in microcosm.  I feel that
thinking about my own children and their education can shed light on
my educational practices at work.

My wife Lesley and I disagree fundamentally about the educational
merits of computer games.  Her view is that computer games are nothing
but worthless pleasure-center stimulation, producing addictive
behaviour with no benefits to the player.  She points to
sensationalised media stories about teenagers coming to terrible harm
due, ostensibly, to too much computer gaming.  She worries about
Zachary's social and physical environment, and observes other boys the
same age playing football and rugby.  Her view is that the opportunity
cost of these computer games is enormous, and yet they provide very
little in the way of educational value.

Zachary's view is that these games are a vital educational component
of his generation, and compares many of the online competitive games
he plays with chess or go.  As part of his gaming, he is teaching
himself new computer languages such as python and ruby and points out
that his computer classes at school are dumbed-down social nonsense.
He argues persuasively that many of the games he plays *are* social
activities, just not face-to-face; many of his games require real-time
discussion mediated by VOIP.  Many of his games are individual, either
playing against friends or strangers; but some are team games; his
team generally comprises school friends who play the same game.  His
team has met a small amount of success in the various leagues in which
he plays.  He further observes that he has met a number of boys
(friends of friends, who attend a different school) through this
mechanism.

My own view is intermediate between these two extremes, although it is
closer to Zachary's than Lesley's.


Sometimes I sit with him, trying to see the world through his eyes,
and trying to understand what (if any) educational value these
activities have.

One game in particular stood out for me: Supreme Commander Forged
Alliance (SCFA).  This game was an RTS (real time strategy) game,
between two teams of four.  Zach's three team-mates were boys I knew
vaguely, and was on nodding terms with their fathers.  The game was
map-based and involved capturing and defending territory, in real
time, against an opposing team of broadly similar strength.  The game
world was represented as a common map, presenting identically to all
players of both teams.  Team members had to create tactics in real
time, and to implement these in the face of a determined and skilled
opposing team.  Zach could talk to his team via a headset, and this
particular night he switched the sound from headphones to loudspeaker,
so I could eavesdrop.  His team was Red, the other one Blue.  Here is,
heavily bowdlerised (the original transcript was rather more
colourful), a discussion between him and his friends:

Z: "You know, we are suffering badly because we don't have control of
that island <points to a region on a map>.  I say we abandon [tactical
objective] and put everything we have into recapturing that island"

S: "I'm with you on that, without that island we ain't got a chance
here"

T: "Are you nuts?  Blue has been there for ages, they're well dug in.
No way can we take it.  I say we consolidate to the South and push
there"

S: "Guys, we're getting hammered on the East, bad.  Zach, look sharp!
We gotta defend the East, like, now.

Z: "Look, we gotta make a decision before we lose the East.  Who says
Yes to taking that island?"

... and so on.  The genre is "Real Time Strategy", clearly strategic.
Note in particular the absence of turn-taking and the panicked
reactions of the team to ongoing in-game events.  Also note the
requirement for cohesive team action: Zach needed the cooperation [and
indeed advice] of the other three players to realise the strategy.  In
this context, good strategy is worthless without the commitment of the
other team members.

It is not clear to me that such games are inferior to, say, chess in
terms of educational value.  Chess is de facto educational; many many
schools run chess clubs, field chess teams, and pay for chess
coaching.  Chess is quite literally beyond reproach as an educational
activity.

For chess to be valuable in this way, two things need to be true: (i),
playing chess cultivates some sort of generic strategic/tactical
ability; and (ii), this ability can transfer to other activities.
There is not the slightest evidence for the truth of either of these
[I am not disputing the demonstrable fact that playing and studying
chess enhances the ability to play chess itself.  Also note that
playing chess demonstrably requires very strong control of
impulsivity, which is valuable in many ways.  But does impulse control
*in the context of a chess match* transfer to other activities?  Not
known].

I could make a case for the educational value of SCFA to be at least
the equal of chess.  There seem to be three or four features that
might be worth mentioning: strategy, tactics, decision-making or
leadership, and cooperation.

Surely the real-time aspect of SCFA should count for something?  Real
life is seldom turn-based, and it is not clear to me whether prowess
in a turn-based game such as chess can possibly have any benefit in
any realistic context.

How about the leadership needed for the game?  I cannot think of any
other game that requires leadership in such an elemental form as SCFA.
Note again that "leadership" here requires not only consensus but also
coordinated action from all the members.  Come to think of it, I
cannot think of *any* activity, game or otherwise, that has such a
pure aspect of leadership built into it.


==Educational leadership ==

How does such reflection affect educational leadership within AUT?  It
has made me reflect on the educational value of the learning
activities that we make our students do, in particular group projects.
I am involved with a number of assessment items that are group marked,
and one of the rationales for this is that it mirrors the workplace in
which teams are part of working life, and we wish to prepare students
for this.  

However, 

The *universal* complaint is the free-rider problem.  Time after time

and yet we are happy


We tend to value essay-writing and standardised tests as traditional
assessment instruments.  We denigrate



In summary, my strong feeling is that we as educators should be open
to non-standard assessment tropes, and there is nothing wrong with
chess or SCFA.
