For the last five years I have been formally enrolled, as a part-time
student, for a Master of Education degree.  I strongly support the
idea of education as modelling behaviours that students can observe,
and aspire to.  I don't think it is reasonable to expect my students
to take their education seriously if I myself do not do.  Lecturers, I
believe, should lead by example.

In my case, my professional (research) world is mathematical, precise,
abstract, eternal, and formal; in contrast, education as a social
construct---when viewed as a topic of study---is vague, inherently
subjective, personal, emotional, and necessarily immersed in an
ever-changing political context.  The two disciplines literally could
not be more different in outlook, artifacts, aims, methods, and
practice.  Thus my studying education represents a rude ejection from
my comfort zone.  The study was intensely discomfiting to someone like
me who received a traditional (Cambridge) mathematics education, in
which formal mathematical proof was the sine qua non.

My studying has resulted in my attempting to change the culture of my
school in AUT in many ways: some long-term and serious, some
incidental and short-lived; some successful and ongoing, some utter
failures.  I regard these attempts as a major positive outcome of my
study.  

Below, I detail some of the ways in which I have influenced my
teaching peers (and superiors!) as a direct result of my studying
education at postgrduate level.  I have roughly ordered the items
according to their occurrence in the table.


1. encouraging others to enrol in education

I have strongly encouraged others to engage in the study of education,
admittedly with limited success.  However, it is not clear to me
whether everyone would benefit from such instruction.  A few people
have said directly to me that I am wasting my time studying education.
Nevertheless, I can't possibly encourage anyone else to undertake such
study without "walking the talk" myself.


2. Treaty of Waitangi

Universities are Crown institutes and are therefore bound by the
Treaty of Waitangi.  To that end, universities have incorporated many
aspects of Maoridom into their procedures such as powhiri, pepeha, and
waiata.  My own view is that such measures do little to address the
underlying social issues faced by many Maori.

However, AUT with its emphasis on enrolling demographics with no
historical tradition of attending university, is well-placed to help
New Zealand become more socially inclusive.  We do this by targetting
low-decile schools and (to be honest) accept students with lower
academic standards than competing institutions, notably the University
of Auckland.  We also operate a campus in South Auckland, close to a
community with consistently low participation in tertiary education.

Such issues are very plain to me now (as a direct result of my
studying) and I take institutional Treaty obligations seriously.
Simply mentioning this viewpoint in a collegiate context is, I would
suggest, a small step towards the institution increasing its
acceptance of Treaty obligations.

Nevertheless, I believe that actions speak louder than words.  One of
my research topics was Maori participation in STEM subjects,
specifically physics.  Maori are under-represented in tertiary
education generally, but in physics are practically (sic) absent.
Observe that one sees regular initiatives aimed at improving uptake of
STEM subjects at tertiary level, and frequent (and largely successful)
initiatives aimed at increasing Maori participation in tertiary
education; but essentially zero effort seems to be expended on
attracting Maori to study STEM subjects.

My belief is that there is a dearth of suitable material available on
the internet to attract or inspire young Maori to physics.  The
so-called "age appropriate" material is boring, condescending, and
does not resemble real science; the more advanced material hopelessly
difficult and offputting.

To address this issue, I have created a YouTube channel ("Trin
Tragula") that discusses everyday physics for schoolchildren in the
AUT Marae.  I make a real effort to illustrate *real* physics (I have
a PhD in fluid mechanics) but the vignettes require equipment: soap
bubbles blowing in the wind; a football rolling on the floor; a paper
aeroplane flying through the whare.

It is fair to say that the channel has not been an unalloyed success
in terms of viewing statistics.  But my view is that it is a (small)
part of the committment that AUT is showing towards Treaty issues.


3. Cheating

One of my consistent and longer-term pedagogical interests is the
'dark side' of education, which my lecturers and tutors (notably Dr
Dean Nugent, lecturer for two of my postgraduate courses) have
encouraged me to study.  My own studying has empowered me to think
about such issues with a view to improving my own practices, and
indeed to try and establish a culture where such issues may be
discussed openly.

Take cheating as an example, the subject of one of my essays at level
7 last year.  Before I started thinking formally about education, my
thinking on cheating amounted to one question: 'how do we stop it'.
Now I view cheating as a valuable source of information and insight
about the process of education itself.  What can we learn from
students who plagiarize work?  Can we design assessments where
cheating is (a) impossible, (b) pointless, (c) undesirable?

NB: Absolutely none of this is to be construed as my becoming 'soft'
on students who are caught cheating.  Quite the contrary: my view is
now to treat cheating extremely seriously but above all consistently.
Students have a right to be treated fairly, and consistency is a large
component of fairness.  At least in AUT, consistency is easy to
achieve: simply report any suspected cheating to the registrar.  This
strategy has many advantages over and above mere consistency: our
registrar is extremely competent and can advise me on the correct way
to think about transgressions.

Specifically, this has changed my thinking on assessment; I now think
of assessment from the perspective of the student, along a spectrum
from 'performance mindset' to 'mastery mindset' (the usual dichotomy
is "performance mindset" vs "*growth* mindset", but "mastery" is a
better educational concept, I believe).  Performance mindsets make
"passing" [a high-stakes academic exam] the primary goal; whereas
mastery mindsets emphasise generalized ability and pride in
accomplishment.  There is no doubt which one is more desirable
academically.

However, the prevalence of cheating (and the associated costs of
managing it) are testament to the fact that the issue is one to be
addressed.

To some extent, the tertiary educational sector has only itself to
blame.  Possession of a degree has long been marketed as a little more
than a ticket to a well-paying job (and indeed there is little
convincing evidence for education per se conferring the slightest
cognitive enhancement).  And of course if the goal is to achieve the
(paper) qualification then cheating becomes a perfectly rational
strategy.

Looking at AUT's advertising copy, we see heavy emphasis on the
employability of AUT graduate.  I would suggest it is easy to confuse
the cognitive enhancement conferred by the educational process with
possession of the qualification.  One standard educational response is
to suggest that the qualification is valued more highly than the
learning.  One way I have discovered of encouraging a mastery mindset
is to make use of portfolio assessment, which I discuss below.



4.  Portfolio assessment

4. Understanding


The words "understand" and "understanding" appear frequently in course
descriptors under the learning objectives.  However, I now realise
that the concept of 'understanding' is considerably more complex than
might be thought.

To take an example, one typical learning objective might read:

"On completing this course, the student will _understand_ linear
equations".

What *exactly* does "understand" mean in this context?  One might be
forgiven for saying, cynically, that it means no more and no less than
"be able to answer well-rehearsed examination questions isomorphic to
those in previous assessments".  But such a view is deeply
unsatisfactory from many many perspectives, although articulating
precisely what is wrong with it is a difficult matter.  For example,
one might hold that it is perfectly possible to answer such
examination questions without a trace of real understanding.  But such
sentiments beg the question: what does "real understanding" mean?

Bereiter considers this and makes several obervations about
understanding.  Using NLM as an example, we have:


* Understanding is a feature of one's relationship with a concept;
  understanding is a thus dependent on how one expects to interact
  with that concept.  Bereiter offers "Newton's Laws of motion" as an
  example (one that I am able to discuss with some insight: I am
  originally a physicist---not a statistician---my PhD is fluid
  dynamics).  "Understanding" NLM will depend on one's relationship
  with them.  One might expect different *kinds* of understanding
  appropriate to a secondary science teacher, a science historian, a
  relativist, and a rocket scientist.  My brother is a professional
  aerospace engineer and I am a theoretical physicist: when we "talk
  shop" we spend 99% of our time bridging our language and cultural
  differences; one would hardly think we are discussing the same
  underlying concepts.

* One classical definition of understanding is the ability to act
  intelligently in relation to the theory.  However, from an
  educational perspective, this is seriously flawed: to achieve
  understanding as so defined, all one has to do is to teach the
  action required to demonstrate "act intelligently": we thus reduce
  our students to performing monkeys, surely not the idea.

* Understanding is inextricably linked to interest.  One might make a
  case for understanding to *require* a certain level of interest on
  the part of a student.  My own feeling is that this, while a
  reasonable requirement, would disbar the majority of undergraduates
  from study.

* Understanding is not necessarily accompanied by an ability to
  explain.  I spent a very frustrating evening with my brother
  discussing a problem in military engineering to no avail: although I
  understood the physics of the problem, I was unable to convince him
  that I was right.

* There can be many types of understanding, not necessarily consistent
  with one another.  There are, however, recognisably incorrect
  interpretations.


I have been reflecting on this for a while now.




5. De-emphasis on learning and learning objectives
6. screencasts




